The cat (Felis catus), also called domestic cat and house cat, is a small domesticated carnivorous mammal.
It is a member of Felidae, the family of mammals in the order Carnivora also colloquially referred to as cats.
It is an obligate carnivore, requiring a predominantly meat-based diet.
Its retractable claws are adapted to killing small prey species such as mice and rats.
It has a strong, flexible body, quick reflexes, and sharp teeth, and its night vision and sense of smell are well developed.
It is a social species, but a solitary hunter and a crepuscular predator.
Cat communication includes meowing, purring, trilling, hissing, growling, grunting, and body language.
It can hear sounds too faint or too high in frequency for human ears, such as those made by small mammals.
It secretes and perceives pheromones.
Cat intelligence is evident in its ability to adapt, learn through observation, and solve problems.
The domestic cat is the only domesticated species of the family Felidae.
Advances in archaeology and genetics have shown that the domestication of the cat started in the Near East around 7500 BCE.
Today, the domestic cat occurs across the globe and is valued by humans for companionship and its ability to kill vermin.
It is commonly kept as a pet, working cat, and pedigreed cat shown at cat fancy events.
Out of the estimated 600 million domestic cats worldwide, 400 million reside in Asia, including 58 million in China.
About 73.8 million cats are estimated to live in the United States, and about 10.9 million cats in the United Kingdom.
It also ranges freely as a feral cat, avoiding human contact.
Pet abandonment contributes to increasing of the global feral cat population, which has driven the decline of bird, mammal, and reptile species.
Population control includes spaying and neutering.
The origin of the English word cat, Old English catt, is thought to be the Late Latin word cattus, which was first used at the beginning of the 6th century.
The Late Latin word may be derived from an unidentified African language.
The Nubian word kaddîska 'wildcat' and Nobiin kadīs are possible sources or cognates.
The forms might also have derived from an ancient Germanic word that was absorbed into Latin and then into Greek, Syriac, and Arabic.
The word may be derived from Germanic and Northern European languages, and ultimately be borrowed from Uralic, cf.
Northern Sámi gáđfi 'female stoat', and Hungarian hölgy 'lady, female stoat'; from Proto-Uralic *käďwä 'female (of a furred animal)'.
The English puss, extended as pussy and pussycat, is attested from the 16th century and may have been introduced from Dutch poes or from Low German puuskatte, related to Swedish kattepus, or Norwegian pus, pusekatt.
Similar forms exist in Lithuanian puižė and Irish puisín or puiscín.
The etymology is unknown, but it may be an onomatopoeia from using a sound to attract a cat.
A male cat is called a tom, tommy or tomcat (or a gib, if neutered).
A female is called a queen (or sometimes a molly, if spayed).
Some sources write that queen refers solely to unspayed cats that are in an estrous cycle.
A juvenile cat is referred to as a kitten (shortened to kitty in British English), a term interchangeable with the now-obsolete word catling in Early Modern English.
A group of cats can be referred to as a clowder, a glaring, or a colony.
The scientific name Felis catus was proposed by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 for a domestic cat.
Felis catus domesticus was proposed by Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben in 1777.
Felis daemon proposed by Konstantin Satunin in 1904 was a black cat from the Transcaucasus, later identified as a domestic cat.
In 2003, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature conserved the name silvestris Erxleben 1777 for the wildcat, but did not suppress catus Linnaeus 1758.
In 2007, the modern domesticated subspecies F.
silvestris catus was sampled worldwide and considered to have probably descended from the African wildcat (F.
lybica), following results of phylogenetic research.
In 2017, the IUCN Cat Classification Taskforce, following the recommendation of Gentry et al.
(2004) that names based on domestic forms be used for domestic derivatives of wild species, regarded the domestic cat as a distinct species, Felis catus.
The domestic cat is a member of the Felidae, a family that has a common ancestor from about 10 to 15 million years ago.
The evolutionary radiation of the Felidae began in Asia during the Miocene around 8.38 to 14.45 million years ago.
Analysis of mitochondrial DNA of all Felidae species indicates a radiation at 6.46 to 16.76 million years ago.
The genus Felis genetically diverged from other Felidae around 6 to 7 million years ago.
Results of phylogenetic research shows that the wild members of this genus evolved through sympatric or parapatric speciation, whereas the domestic cat evolved through artificial selection.
The genome sequence of the domestic cat was first published in 2007 and is available at the National Center for Biotechnology Information.
The domestic cat and its closest wild ancestor both possess 19 chromosome pairs and roughly 20,000 genes.
The cat genome sequence has been used for various purposes, including the study of cat migration patterns and disease.
It was long thought that the domestication of the cat began in ancient Egypt, where cats were venerated from around 3100 BCE.
However, the earliest known indication for the taming of an African wildcat was excavated close by a human Neolithic grave in Shillourokambos, southern Cyprus, dating to about 7500–7200 BCE.
Since there is no evidence of native mammalian fauna on Cyprus, the inhabitants of this village most likely brought the cat and other wild mammals to the island from the West Asian mainland.
Scientists therefore assume that African wildcats were attracted to early human settlements in the Fertile Crescent by rodents, in particular the house mouse (Mus musculus), and were tamed by Neolithic farmers.
This mutual relationship between early farmers and tamed cats lasted thousands of years.
As agricultural practices spread, so did tame and domesticated cats.
Wildcats of Egypt contributed to the maternal gene pool of the domestic cat at a later time.
The earliest known evidence for the occurrence of the domestic cat in Greece dates to around 1200 BCE.
Greek, Phoenician, Carthaginian and Etruscan traders introduced it to southern Europe.
By the 5th century BCE, it was a familiar animal around settlements in Magna Graecia and Etruria.
During the Roman Empire, it was introduced to Corsica and Sardinia.
By the end of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century, the Egyptian domestic cat lineage had arrived in a Baltic Sea port in northern Germany.
The leopard cat (Prionailurus bengalensis) was tamed independently in China around 5500 BCE.
This line of a partially domesticated cat left no trace in the domestic cat populations of today.
During domestication, cats have undergone only minor changes in anatomy and behavior, and they are still capable of surviving in the wild.
Several natural behaviors and characteristics of wildcats may have pre-adapted them for domestication as pets.
These traits include their small size, social nature, obvious body language, love of play, and high intelligence.
Their rigorous grooming habits and instinct to bury their bodily waste make them generally much less messy than other domesticated animals.
Captive Leopardus cats may also display affectionate behavior toward humans but are not domesticated.
House cats may mate with feral cats.
The development of cat breeds started in the mid-19th century.
An analysis of the domestic cat genome revealed that the ancestral wildcat genome was significantly altered in the process of domestication, as specific mutations were selected to develop cat breeds.
Most breeds are founded on random-bred domestic cats; genetic diversity of these breeds varies between regions, and is lowest in purebred populations, which show more than 20 deleterious genetic disorders.
Hybridization between domestic and other Felinae species is also possible, producing hybrids such as the Kellas cat in Scotland.
The domestic cat has a smaller skull and shorter bones than the European wildcat.
It averages about 46 cm (18 in) in head-to-body length and 23–25 cm (9.1–9.8 in) in height, with about 30 cm (12 in) long tails.
Males are larger than females.
Adult domestic cats typically weigh 4–5 kg (8.8–11.0 lb).
Cats have seven cervical vertebrae (as do most mammals); 13 thoracic vertebrae (humans have 12); seven lumbar vertebrae (humans have five); three sacral vertebrae (as do most mammals, but humans have five); and a variable number of caudal vertebrae in the tail (humans have only three to five vestigial caudal vertebrae, fused into an internal coccyx).
The extra lumbar and thoracic vertebrae account for the cat's spinal mobility and flexibility.
Attached to the spine are 13 ribs, the shoulder, and the pelvis.
Unlike human arms, cat forelimbs are attached to the shoulder by free-floating clavicle bones which allow them to pass their body through any space into which they can fit their head.
The cat skull is unusual among mammals in having very large eye sockets and a powerful specialized jaw.
Two long canine teeth for killing and tearing prey can stab between two of the prey's vertebrae and sever its spinal cord, causing paralysis and death.
Compared to other felines, domestic cats have narrowly spaced canine teeth relative to the size of their jaw, which is an adaptation to their preferred prey of small rodents, which have small vertebrae.
The premolar and first molar together compose the carnassial pair on each side of the mouth, which efficiently shears meat into small pieces, like a pair of scissors.
These are vital in feeding, because cats' small molars cannot chew food effectively, and cats are largely incapable of mastication.
Cats tend to have better dental health than most humans, with decay generally less likely because of a thicker protective layer of enamel, a less damaging saliva, less retention of food particles between teeth, and a diet mostly devoid of sugar.
Nonetheless, they are subject to occasional tooth loss and infection.
Cats have protractible and retractable claws.
In their normal, relaxed position, the claws are sheathed with the skin and fur around the paw's toe pads.
This keeps the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows for the silent stalking of prey.
The claws on the forefeet are typically sharper than those on the hindfeet.
Cats can voluntarily extend their claws, such as in hunting, fighting, climbing, kneading, or for extra traction on soft surfaces.
Cats shed the outside layer of their claw sheaths when scratching rough surfaces.
Most cats have five claws on their front paws and four on their rear paws.
The dewclaw is proximal to the other claws.
More proximally is a protrusion which appears to be a sixth "finger".
This special feature of the front paws on the inside of the wrists has no function in normal walking but is thought to be an antiskidding device used while jumping.
Some cat breeds are prone to having extra digits ("polydactyly").
The cat is digitigrade.
It walks on the toes, with the bones of the feet making up the lower part of the visible leg.
Unlike most mammals, it uses a "pacing" gait that alternates both legs together on each side.
It registers directly by placing each hind paw close to the track of the corresponding fore paw, minimizing noise and visible tracks.
This also provides sure footing for hind paws when navigating rough terrain.
As it speeds up from walking to trotting, its gait changes to a "diagonal" gait: The diagonally opposite hind and fore legs move simultaneously.
Cats are generally fond of perching in high places.
This may be a concealed hunting site such as a tree branch, for domestic cats to pounce upon prey.
They favor a superior observation point over territory.
A cat falling from up to 3 m (9.8 ft) can right itself and land on its paws.
During a lofty fall, a cat reflexively twists and rights itself to land on its feet using its acute sense of balance and flexibility.
This reflex is known as the cat righting reflex.
A cat always rights itself in the same way, and it has enough time in falls of at least 90 cm (3.0 ft).
This has been investigated as the "falling cat problem".
The domestic cat genes MC1R and ASIP allow color variety in the coat.
The feline ASIP gene consists of three coding exons.
Three novel microsatellite markers linked to ASIP were isolated from a domestic cat BAC clone containing this gene to perform linkage analysis on 89 domestic cats segregated for melanism.
The domestic cat family demonstrated a cosegregation between the ASIP allele and black coloration of the coat.
The cat is an obligate carnivore and has adapted to a low-fibre highly digestible meat diet.
Cats have fewer enzymes capable of metabolising carbohydrates compared to omnivores.
The cat lacks the ability to convert carotenoids to vitamin A; has an inability to synthesise enough vitamin D; inability to synthesise niacin from tryptophan; inability to synthesise cysteine, citrulline, and methionine; lacks glucokinase activity; and an intolerance to glutamic acid (which is low in animal tissue and high in plant matter).
Taurine and arginine are essential for cats.
Due to the inability to synthesise adequate amounts of citrulline a single meal lacking in arginine can be fatal to a cat.
Cats cannot produce enough taurine and require dietary taurine; a lack of taurine will cause a cat to develop dilated cardiomyopathy.
Commercial cat diets historically were lacking in taurine and dilated cardiomyopathy was a common issue until it was linked to taurine deficiency in a 1987 study.
Cats have excellent night vision and can see at one sixth the light level required for human vision.
This is partly the result of cat eyes having a tapetum lucidum, which reflects any light that passes through the retina back into the eye, thereby increasing the eye's sensitivity to dim light.
Large pupils are an adaptation to dim light.
The domestic cat has slit pupils, which allow it to focus bright light without chromatic aberration.
At low light, a cat's pupils expand to cover most of the exposed surface of its eyes.
The domestic cat has rather poor color vision and only two types of cone cells, optimized for sensitivity to blue and yellowish green; its ability to distinguish between red and green is limited.
A response to middle wavelengths from a system other than the rod cells might be due to a third type of cone.
This appears to be an adaptation to low light levels rather than representing true trichromatic vision.
Cats have a nictitating membrane, allowing them to blink without hindering their vision.
The domestic cat's hearing is most acute in the range of 500 Hz to 32 kHz.
It can detect an extremely broad range of frequencies ranging from 55 Hz to 79 kHz, whereas humans can only detect frequencies between 20 Hz and 20 kHz.
It can hear a range of 10.5 octaves, compared to about 9 octaves for humans and dogs.
Its hearing sensitivity is enhanced by its large movable outer ears, the pinnae, which amplify sounds and help detect the location of a noise.
It can detect ultrasound, including ultrasonic calls from rodent prey.
Research has shown that cats have socio-spatial cognitive abilities to create mental maps of familiar people's locations based on hearing their voices.
Cats have an acute sense of smell, due in part to their well-developed olfactory bulb and a large surface of olfactory mucosa, about 5.8 cm2 (0.90 in2) in area, which is about twice that of humans.
Cats and many other animals have a Jacobson's organ in their mouths that is used in the behavioral process of flehmening.
It allows them to sense certain aromas in a way that humans cannot.
Cats are sensitive to pheromones such as 3-mercapto-3-methylbutan-1-ol, which they use to communicate through urine spraying and marking with scent glands.
Many cats also respond strongly to plants that contain nepetalactone, especially catnip, which they can detect at less than one part per billion.
About 70–80% of cats are affected by nepetalactone.
This response is also produced by other plants, such as silver vine (Actinidia polygama) and the herb valerian; it may be caused by the smell of these plants mimicking a pheromone and stimulating cats' social or sexual behaviors.
Cats have about 470 taste buds, compared to more than 9,000 on the human tongue.
Domestic and wild cats share a taste receptor gene mutation that keeps their sweet taste buds from binding to sugary molecules, leaving them with no ability to taste sweetness.
But they do have taste bud receptors specialized for acids, amino acids such as the constituents of protein, and bitter tastes.
Cats' taste buds possess the receptors needed to detect umami.
However, these receptors contain molecular changes that make them taste umami differently from humans.
In humans, they detect the amino acids glutamic acid and aspartic acid; but in cats, they instead detect inosine monophosphate and histidine.
These molecules are particularly enriched in tuna.
Researchers argue why cats find tuna so palatable: "the specific combination of the high IMP and free histidine contents of tuna, which produces a strong umami taste synergy that is highly preferred by cats." One researcher said, "I think umami is as important for cats as sweet is for humans."
Cats distinctly prefer food temperature around 38 °C (100 °F), similar to a fresh kill.
Some cats reject cold food, which would signal to the cat that the prey is long dead and therefore possibly toxic or decomposing.
To aid with navigation and sensation, cats have dozens of movable whiskers (vibrissae) over their body, most prominently on their faces, as seen by the long, white lines diverging outwards from its nose.
These provide information on the width of gaps and on the location of objects in the dark, both by touching objects directly and by sensing air currents.
They trigger protective blink reflexes to protect the eyes from damage.
Outdoor cats are active both day and night, although they tend to be slightly more active at night.
Domestic cats spend the majority of their time in the vicinity of their homes, but they can range a radius of many hundreds of meters.
They establish territories that vary considerably in size, in one study ranging 7–28 ha (17–69 acres).
The timing of cats' activity is quite flexible and varied; but being low-light predators, they are generally crepuscular, which means they tend to be more active near dawn and dusk.
However, house cats' behavior is also influenced by human activity, and they may adapt to their owners' sleeping patterns to some extent.
Cats conserve energy by sleeping more than most animals, especially as they grow older.
The daily duration of sleep varies, usually between 12 and 16 hours, with 13 to 14 being the average.
Some cats can sleep as much as 20 hours.
The term "cat nap" for a short rest refers to the cat's tendency to fall asleep (lightly) for a brief period.
Short periods of rapid eye movement sleep are often accompanied by muscle twitches, which suggests they are dreaming.
Behavioral and personality traits depend on a complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors.
Scientific evidence does not support the popular belief that those traits are linked to coat colors.
The social behavior of the domestic cat ranges from widely dispersed individuals to feral cat colonies that gather around a food source, based on groups of co-operating females.
Within such groups, one cat is usually dominant over the others.
Each cat in a colony holds a distinct territory, with sexually active males having the largest territories, which are about 10 times larger than those of female cats and may overlap with several females' territories.
These territories are marked by urine spraying, rubbing objects at head height with secretions from facial glands, and by defecation.
Between these territories are neutral areas where cats watch and greet one another without territorial conflicts.
Outside these neutral areas, territory holders usually chase away stranger cats, at first by staring, hissing, and growling, and, if that does not work, by short and violent, noisy attacks.
Because cats do not have a social survival strategy or herd behavior, they always hunt alone.
Life in proximity to humans and other domestic animals has led to a symbiotic social adaptation in cats, and cats may express great affection toward humans or other animals.
Ethologically, a cat's human keeper functions as a mother surrogate.
Adult cats live in a type of extended kittenhood, a form of behavioral neoteny.
Their high-pitched sounds may mimic the cries of a hungry human infant, making them particularly difficult for humans to ignore.
Some pet cats are poorly socialized.
In particular, older cats may show aggressiveness toward newly arrived kittens, which includes biting and scratching; this type of behavior is known as feline asocial aggression.
Redirected aggression is a common form of aggression that can occur in multiple cat households.
In redirected aggression, a cat is usually agitated by a stimulus such as a sight, sound, or other trigger that causes heightened anxiety or arousal; if the cat cannot attack the original stimulus, it may redirect its aggression toward the nearest cat, pet, human, or other being.
Domestic cats' scent rubbing behavior toward humans or other cats is thought to be a feline means of social bonding.
Domestic cats use many vocalizations for communication, including purring, trilling, hissing, growling/snarling, grunting, and several different forms of meowing.
Their body language, including position of ears and tail, relaxation of the whole body, and kneading of the paws, are all indicators of mood.
The tail and ears are particularly important social signal mechanisms; a raised tail indicates a friendly greeting, and flattened ears indicate hostility.
Tail-raising also indicates the cat's position in the group's social hierarchy, with dominant individuals raising their tails less often than subordinate ones.
Feral cats are generally silent.
Nose-to-nose touching is also a common greeting and may be followed by social grooming, which is solicited by one of the cats raising and tilting its head.
Purring may have developed as an evolutionary advantage as a signaling mechanism of reassurance between mother cats and nursing kittens, who are thought to use it as a care-soliciting signal.
Post-nursing cats also often purr as a sign of contentment: when being petted, becoming relaxed, or eating.
Although purring is popularly interpreted as indicative of pleasure, it has been recorded in a wide variety of circumstances, most of which involve physical contact between the cat and another, presumably trusted individual.
Some cats have been observed to purr continuously when chronically ill or in apparent pain.
The exact mechanism by which cats purr has long been elusive, but it has been proposed that purring is generated via a series of sudden build-ups and releases of pressure as the glottis is opened and closed, which causes the vocal folds to separate forcefully.
The laryngeal muscles in control of the glottis are thought to be driven by a neural oscillator which generates a cycle of contraction and release every 30–40 milliseconds (giving a frequency of 33 to 25 Hz).
Domestic cats observed in rescue facilities have 276 morphologically distinct facial expressions based on 26 facial movements; each facial expression corresponds to different social functions that are probably influenced by domestication.
Facial expressions have helped researchers detect pain in cats.
The feline grimace scale's five criteria—ear position, orbital tightening, muzzle tension, whisker change, and head position—indicated the presence of acute pain in cats.
Cats are known for spending considerable amounts of time licking their coats to keep them clean.
The cat's tongue has backward-facing spines about 0.5 millimeter long, called filiform papillae, which contain keratin making them rigid.
The papillae act like a hairbrush, and some cats, particularly long-haired cats, occasionally regurgitate sausage-shaped 2–3 cm (0.8–1.2 in) long hairballs of fur that have collected in their stomachs from grooming.
Hairballs can be prevented with remedies that ease elimination of the hair through the gut, and regular grooming of the coat with a comb or stiff brush.
Cat intelligence refers to a cat's ability to solve problems, adapt to its environment, learn new behaviors, and communicate its needs.
Structurally, a cat's brain shares similarities with the human brain, containing around 250 million neurons in the cerebral cortex, which is responsible for complex processing.
Cats display neuroplasticity allowing their brains to reorganize based on experiences.
They have well-developed memory retaining information for a decade or longer.
These memories are often intertwined with emotions, allowing cats to recall both positive and negative experiences associated with specific places.
While they excel in observational learning and problem-solving, studies conclude that they struggle with understanding cause-and-effect relationships in the same way that humans do.
Cat intelligence study is mostly from consideration of the domesticated cat.
Living in urban environments has exposed it to challenges that require adaptive behaviors, contributing to cognitive development.
Selective breeding and genetic changes have further influenced its intelligence.
Kittens learn essential survival skills by observing their mothers, while adult cats refine their abilities through trial and error.
Domestic cats, especially young kittens, are known for their love of play.
This behavior mimics hunting and is important in helping kittens learn to stalk, capture, and kill prey.
Cats also engage in play fighting, both with each other and with humans.
This behavior may be a way for cats to practice the skills needed for real combat, and it might also reduce the fear that they associate with launching attacks on other animals.
Cats also tend to play with toys more when they are hungry.
Owing to the close similarity between play and hunting, cats prefer to play with objects that resemble prey, such as small furry toys that move rapidly, but rapidly lose interest.
They become habituated to a toy they have played with before.
String is often used as a toy, but if it is eaten, it can become caught at the base of the cat's tongue and then move into the intestines, a medical emergency which can cause serious illness, even death.
The shape and structure of cats' cheeks is insufficient to allow them to take in liquids using suction.
Lapping at a rate of four times a second, the cat touches the smooth tip of its tongue to the surface of the water, and quickly retracts it like a corkscrew, drawing water upward into their mouths.
Feral cats and free-fed house cats consume several small meals in a day.
The frequency and size of meals varies between individuals.
They select food based on its temperature, smell, and texture; they dislike chilled foods and respond most strongly to moist foods rich in amino acids, which are similar to meat.
Cats reject novel flavors (a response termed neophobia) and learn quickly to avoid foods that have tasted unpleasant in the past.
It is also a common misconception that all cats like milk or cream, as they tend to avoid sweet food and milk.
Most adult cats are lactose intolerant; the sugar in milk is not easily digested and may cause soft stools or diarrhea.
Some also develop odd eating habits and like to eat or chew on things such as wool, plastic, cables, paper, string, aluminum foil, or even coal.
This condition, pica, can threaten their health, depending on the amount and toxicity of the items eaten.
Cats hunt small prey, primarily birds and rodents, and are often used as a form of pest control.
Other common small creatures, such as lizards, snakes and insects, may also become prey.
Cats use two hunting strategies, either stalking prey actively, or waiting in ambush until a prey animal comes close enough to be captured.
The strategy used depends on available prey, with cats waiting in ambush outside burrows, but tending to actively stalk birds.
Domestic cats are a major predators of wildlife in the United States, killing an estimated 1.3 to 4.0 billion birds and 6.3 to 22.3 billion mammals annually.
Certain species appear more susceptible than others; in one English village, for example, 30% of house sparrow mortality was linked to the domestic cat.
In the recovery of ringed robins (Erithacus rubecula) and dunnocks (Prunella modularis) in Britain, 31% of deaths were a result of cat predation.
In parts of North America, the presence of larger carnivores such as coyotes, which prey on cats and other small predators, reduces the effect of predation by cats and other small predators such as opossums and raccoons on bird numbers and variety.
Another poorly understood element of cat hunting behavior is the presentation of prey to human guardians.
One explanation is that cats adopt humans into their social group and share excess kill with others in the group according to the dominance hierarchy, in which humans are reacted to as if they are at or near the top.
Another explanation is that they attempt to teach their guardians to hunt or to help their human as if feeding "an elderly cat, or an inept kitten".
This hypothesis is inconsistent with the fact that male cats also bring home prey, though males have negligible involvement in raising kittens.
Domestic males are more likely to fight than females.
The most common reason for feral cat fighting is competition between two males to mate with a female, and most fights are won by the heavier male.
Another common reason for fighting in domestic cats is the difficulty of establishing territories within a small home.
Female cats also fight over territory or to defend their kittens.
Neutering decreases or eliminates this behavior in many cases, suggesting that the behavior is linked to sex hormones.
When cats become aggressive, they try to appear larger and more threatening by raising their fur, arching their backs, turning sideways, hissing, or spitting.
Often, the ears are pointed down and back to avoid damage to the inner ear and potentially listen for any changes behind them while focused forward.
Cats may also vocalize loudly and bare their teeth in an effort to further intimidate their opponents.
Fights usually consist of grappling, slapping the face and body with the forepaws, and bites.
Cats throw themselves to the ground in a defensive posture to rake their opponent's belly with their hind legs.
Serious damage is rare, because the fights are usually short, with the loser fleeing with scratches to the face and ears.
More severe fights for mating rights may give deep punctures and lacerations.
Normally, serious injuries from fighting are limited to infections from scratches and bites.
Bites are probably the main route of transmission of the feline immunodeficiency virus.
Sexually active males are usually involved in many fights and have battered faces.
Cats often threaten animals larger than them to defend their territory, such as dogs and foxes.
The cat secretes and perceives pheromones.
Female cats, called queens, are polyestrous with several estrus cycles during a year, lasting usually 21 days.
They are usually ready to mate between early February and August in northern temperate zones and throughout the year in equatorial regions.
Several males, called tomcats, are attracted to a female in heat.
They fight over her, and the victor wins the right to mate.
At first, the female rejects the male, but eventually, the female allows the male to mate.
The female utters a loud yowl as the male pulls out of her because a male cat's penis has a band of about 120–150 backward-pointing penile spines, which are about 1 mm (0.04 in) long; upon withdrawal of the penis, the spines may provide the female with increased sexual stimulation, which acts to induce ovulation.
After mating, the female cleans her vulva thoroughly.
If a male attempts to mate with her at this point, the female attacks him.
After about 20 to 30 minutes, once the female is finished grooming, the cycle will repeat.
Because ovulation is not always triggered by a single mating, females may not be impregnated by the first male with which they mate.
Furthermore, cats are superfecund; that is, a female may mate with more than one male when she is in heat, with the result that different kittens in a litter may have different fathers.
The morula forms 124 hours after conception.
At 148 hours, early blastocysts form.
At 10–12 days, implantation occurs.
The gestation of queens lasts between 64 and 67 days, with an average of 65 days.
Based on a study of 2,300 free-ranging queens conducted from May 1998 and October 2000, they had one to six kittens per litter, with an average of three kittens.
They produced a mean of 1.4 litters per year, but a maximum of three litters in a year.
Of 169 kittens, 127 died before they were six months old due to a trauma caused in most cases by dog attacks and road accidents.
The first litter is usually smaller than subsequent litters.
Kittens are weaned between six and seven weeks of age.
Queens normally reach sexual maturity at 5–10 months, and males at 5–7 months.
This varies depending on breed.
Kittens reach puberty at the age of 9–10 months.
Cats are ready to go to new homes at about 12 weeks of age, when they are ready to leave their mother.
They can be surgically sterilized (spayed or castrated) as early as seven weeks to limit unwanted reproduction.
This surgery also prevents undesirable sex-related behavior, such as aggression, territory marking (spraying urine) in males, and yowling (calling) in females.
Traditionally, this surgery was performed at around six to nine months of age, but it is increasingly being performed before puberty, at about three to six months.
In the United States, about 80% of household cats are neutered.
The average lifespan of pet cats has risen in recent decades.
In the early 1980s, it was about 7 years, rising to 9.4 years in 1995 and an average of about 13 years as of 2014 and 2023.
Neutering increases life expectancy; one 2024 study found neutered cats to live one year longer than entire cats.
Having a cat neutered confers some health benefits, such as a decreased incidence of reproductive neoplasia.
However, neutering decreases metabolism and increases food intake, both of which can cause obesity in neutered cats.
Pre-pubertal neutering (neutering at 4 months or earlier) was only recommended by 28% of American veterinarians in one study.
Some concerns of early neutering were metabolic, retarded physeal closure, and urinary tract disease related.
About 250 heritable genetic disorders have been identified in cats; many are similar to human inborn errors of metabolism.
The high level of similarity among the metabolism of mammals allows many of these feline diseases to be diagnosed using genetic tests that were originally developed for use in humans, as well as the use of cats as animal models in the study of the human diseases.
Diseases affecting domestic cats include acute infections, parasitic infestations, injuries, and chronic diseases such as kidney disease, hyperthyroidism, and arthritis.
Vaccinations are available for many infectious diseases, as are treatments to eliminate parasites such as worms, ticks, and fleas.
Between 50% and 90% of cats experience dental or gum problems, but these can be prevented by maintaining the cat's oral hygiene using products specifically designed for cats, which are not toxic for them.
Accidental poisoning in cats is common and can result from several sources: plants that are toxic to cats, medications not intended for cats, foods unsuitable for cats, and household substances such as pesticides and household cleaners.
Plants toxic to cats include lilies, tulips, and philodendrons; medication poisoning occurs when cats ingest drugs intended for human, such as acetaminophen and aspirin, as well as vitamin capsules, flea treatments designed for dogs, and foods dangerous to cats like grapes, onions, garlic, and chocolate.
Cat owners' attitudes and knowledge affects how they care for their cats, and people with greater knowledge about cats are less likely to use positive punishment, i.e.
causing an unpleasant stimulus to the cat.
Several organizations have published guidelines for the proper and safe care of cats.
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals has published a general guide emphasizing proper cat care, which covers appropriate nutrition and needs for fresh and clean water, coat care, litter box maintenance, regular veterinary care.
The American Association of Feline Practitioners and the International Society of Feline Medicine released a guide on environmental needs of cats.
Professional organizations have emphasized the importance of environmental enrichment for cats, and some authors have raised concerns that many cat owners do not provide sufficient environmental enrichment.
In an online survey of cat owners, only about half of the respondents reported playing with their cats daily.
Guidelines have also been published for veterinarians and caregivers to improve the welfare of cats under their care, including recommendations for cat-friendly interactions in veterinary clinics.
The guide focuses on five main aspects: providing a safe private space for the cat (e.g., a cardboard box on its side, placed in a high location, and in sufficient numbers if multiple cats are present); offering multiple environmental resources (several feeding stations, resting areas and litter boxes, and separating food from water); opportunities for play and activities that simulate hunting behavior (using appropriate toys and puzzle feeders); positive, consistent, and predictable social interaction (acclimating the cat to frequent contact from an early age, speaking softly, and avoiding forced contact); and an environment that allows the cat to use its sense of smell normally (providing scratching posts and other items where it can leave its scent, and avoiding strong odors throughout the home).
The domestic cat is a cosmopolitan species and occurs across much of the world.
It is adaptable and now present on all continents except Antarctica, and on 118 of the 131 main groups of islands, even on the remote Kerguelen Islands.
Due to its ability to thrive in almost any terrestrial habitat, it is among the world's most invasive species.
It lives on small islands with no human inhabitants.
Feral cats can live in forests, grasslands, tundra, coastal areas, agricultural land, scrublands, urban areas, and wetlands.
The unwantedness that leads to the domestic cat being treated as an invasive species is twofold.
As it is little altered from the wildcat, it can readily interbreed with the wildcat.
This hybridization poses a danger to the genetic distinctiveness of some wildcat populations, particularly in Scotland and Hungary, possibly also the Iberian Peninsula, and where protected natural areas are close to human-dominated landscapes, such as Kruger National Park in South Africa.
However, its introduction to places where no native felines are present also contributes to the decline of native species.
Feral cats are domestic cats that were born in or have reverted to a wild state.
They are unfamiliar with and wary of humans and roam freely in urban and rural areas.
The numbers of feral cats are not known, but estimates of the United States feral population range from 25 to 60 million.
Feral cats may live alone, but most are in large colonies, which occupy a specific territory and are usually associated with a source of food.
Famous feral cat colonies are in Rome around the Colosseum and Forum Romanum, some being fed and given medical attention by volunteers.
Public attitudes toward feral cats vary widely, from seeing them as free-ranging pets to regarding them as vermin.
Domestic cats are a contributing factor to the decline of several species, a factor that has ultimately led, in some cases, to extinction.
The South Island piopio, Chatham rail, and the New Zealand merganser are a few from a long list, with the most extreme case being the flightless Lyall's wren, which was driven to extinction only a few years after its discovery.
One feral cat in New Zealand killed 102 New Zealand lesser short-tailed bats in seven days.
In the United States, feral and free-ranging domestic cats kill an estimated 6.3–22.3 billion mammals annually.
In Australia, one study found feral cats to kill 466 million reptiles per year.
More than 258 reptile species were identified as being predated by cats.
Cats have contributed to the extinction of the Navassa curly-tailed lizard and Chioninia coctei.
Cats are common pets throughout the world, and their worldwide population as of 2007 exceeded 500 million.
As of 2024, the domestic cat was the second most popular pet in the United States, with 73.8 million cats owned and around 42.2 million households owning at least one cat.
In the United Kingdom, 26% of adults have a cat, with an estimated population of 10.9 million pet cats as of 2020.
As of 2021, there were an estimated 220 million owned and 480 million stray cats in the world.
Cats have been used for millennia to control rodents, notably around grain stores and aboard ships, and both uses extend to the present day.
Cats are also used in the international fur trade and leather industries for making coats, hats, blankets, stuffed toys, shoes, gloves, and musical instruments.
About 24 cats are needed to make a cat-fur coat.
This use has been outlawed in the United States since 2000 and in the European Union (as well as the United Kingdom) since 2007.
Cat pelts have been used for superstitious purposes as part of the practice of witchcraft, and they are still made into blankets in Switzerland as traditional medicines thought to cure rheumatism.
A few attempts to build a cat census have been made over the years, both through associations or national and international organizations (such as that of the Canadian Federation of Humane Societies) and over the Internet.
General estimates for the global population of domestic cats range widely from anywhere between 200 million to 600 million.
Walter Chandoha made his career photographing cats after his 1949 images of Loco, a stray cat, were published.
He is reported to have photographed 90,000 cats during his career and maintained an archive of 225,000 images that he drew from for publications during his lifetime.
Pet humanization is a form of anthropomorphism in which cats are kept for companionship and treated more like human family members than traditional pets.
This trend of pet culture involves providing cats with a higher level of care, attention and often even luxury, similar to the way humans are treated.
A cat show is a judged event in which the owners of cats compete to win titles in various cat-registering organizations by entering their cats to be judged after a breed standard.
It is often required that a cat must be healthy and vaccinated to participate in a cat show.
Both pedigreed and non-purebred companion ("moggy") cats are admissible, although the rules differ depending on the organization.
Competing cats are compared to the applicable breed standard, and assessed for temperament.
Cats can be infected or infested with viruses, pathogenic bacteria, fungus, protozoans, arthropods or worms that can transmit diseases to humans; infections of most concern include salmonella, cat-scratch disease, and toxoplasmosis.
In some cases, the cat exhibits no symptoms of the disease.
The same disease can then become evident in a human.
The likelihood that a person will become diseased depends on the age and immune status of the person.
Others might also acquire infections from cat feces and parasites exiting the cat's body.
In ancient Egypt, cats were revered.
The goddess Bastet was often depicted in cat form, sometimes taking on the war-like aspect of a lioness.
The Greek historian Herodotus reported that killing a cat was forbidden, and when a household cat died, the entire family mourned and shaved their eyebrows.
Families took their dead cats to the sacred city of Bubastis, where they were embalmed and buried in sacred repositories.
Herodotus expressed astonishment at the domestic cats in Egypt, because he had only ever seen wildcats.
Ancient Greeks and Romans kept weasels as pets, which were seen as the ideal rodent-killers.
The earliest unmistakable evidence of the Greeks having domestic cats comes from two coins from Magna Graecia dating to the mid-fifth century BC showing Iokastos and Phalanthos, the legendary founders of Rhegion and Taras respectively, playing with their pet cats.
The usual ancient Greek word for 'cat' was ailouros, meaning 'thing with the waving tail'.
Cats are rarely mentioned in ancient Greek literature.
Aristotle remarked in his History of Animals that "female cats are naturally lecherous".
The Greeks later syncretized their own goddess Artemis with the Egyptian goddess Bastet, adopting Bastet's associations with cats and ascribing them to Artemis.
In Ovid's Metamorphoses, when the deities flee to Egypt and take animal forms, the goddess Diana turns into a cat.
Cats eventually displaced weasels as the pest control of choice because they were more pleasant to have around the house and were more enthusiastic hunters of mice.
During the Middle Ages, many of Artemis's associations with cats were grafted onto the Virgin Mary.
Cats are often shown in icons of Annunciation and of the Holy Family and, according to Italian folklore, on the same night that Mary gave birth to Jesus, a cat in Bethlehem gave birth to a kitten.
Domestic cats were spread throughout much of the rest of the world during the Age of Discovery, as ships' cats were carried on sailing ships to control shipboard rodents and as good-luck charms.
Several ancient religions believed cats are exalted souls, companions or guides for humans, that are all-knowing but mute so they cannot influence decisions made by humans.
In Japan, the maneki neko cat is a symbol of good fortune.
In Norse mythology, Freyja, the goddess of love, beauty, and fertility, is depicted as riding a chariot drawn by cats.
In Jewish legend, the first cat was living in the house of the first man Adam as a pet that got rid of mice.
The cat was once partnering with the first dog before the latter broke an oath they had made which resulted in enmity between the descendants of these two animals.
It is also written that neither cats nor foxes are represented in the water, while every other animal has an incarnation species in the water.
Although no species are sacred in Islam, cats are revered by Muslims.
Some Western writers have stated Muhammad had a favorite cat, Muezza.
He is reported to have loved cats so much, "he would do without his cloak rather than disturb one that was sleeping on it".
The story has no origin in early Muslim writers, and seems to confuse a story of a later Sufi saint, Ahmed ar-Rifa'i, centuries after Muhammad.
One of the companions of Muhammad was known as Abu Hurayrah ("father of the kitten"), in reference to his documented affection to cats.
Many cultures have negative superstitions about cats.
For example, that encountering a black cat ("crossing one's path") leads to bad luck, or that cats are witches' familiar spirits used to augment a witch's powers and skills.
The killing of cats in medieval Ypres, Belgium, is commemorated in the innocuous present-day Kattenstoet (cat parade).
According to a myth in many cultures, cats have multiple lives.
In many countries, they are believed to have nine lives, but in Italy, Germany, Greece, Brazil, and some Spanish-speaking regions, they are said to have seven lives, while in Arabic traditions, the number of lives is six.
An early mention of the myth is in John Heywood's The Proverbs of John Heywood (1546):
The myth is attributed to the natural suppleness and swiftness cats exhibit to escape life-threatening situations.
Falling cats often land on their feet, using an instinctive righting reflex to twist their bodies around.
The dictionary definition of cat at Wiktionary
Data related to Felis catus at Wikispecies
Media related to Cats at Wikimedia Commons
Animal Care at Wikibooks
Quotations related to Cat at Wikiquote
"Cat, Domestic, The" .
Encyclopedia Americana.
Biodiversity Heritage Library bibliography for Felis catus
View the cat genome in Ensembl
High-resolution images of the cat's brain
"The Origin of the Cat".
Cat behavior encompasses the actions and reactions displayed by a cat in response to various stimuli and events.
Cat behavior includes body language, elimination habits, aggression, play, communication, hunting, grooming, urine marking, and face rubbing.
It varies among individuals, colonies, and breeds.
Communication and sociability can vary greatly among individual cats.
In a family with many cats, the interactions can change depending on which individuals are present and how restricted the territory and resources are.
One or more individuals may become aggressive: fighting may occur with the attack, resulting in scratches and deep bite wounds.
Kittens vocalize early in development.
Some examples of different vocalizations are described below.
Purring – Commonly associated with relaxation and contentment in cats.
Cats purr during activities such as: eating and resting, as well as when they are experiencing stress, pain, or illness.
Meowing – It serves various communicative purposes in cats.
It can function as a greeting, a request, a form of protest, or a general expression of attention-seeking behavior.
Some cats have been observed vocalizing while moving through their environment, seemingly meowing to themselves.
Hissing or spitting – This indicates an angry or defensive cat.
Yowling or Howling – It is a prolonged loud meow sound that a cat would make to indicate that they are in distress.
The distress could be multiple indications, such as being trapped, in pain, or simply looking for their owners.
Chattering – This occurs when hunting or tracking potential prey.
This consists of quick chirps made while the mouth vibrates.
The gaze is fixed and staring.
This behavior may be in response to a surge of adrenaline or may be caused by the anticipation of a pending hunt.
Cats rely strongly on body language to communicate.
A cat may rub against an object or lick a person.
Much of a cat's body language is through its tail, ears, head position, and back posture.
Observing how a cat holds its tail can give a good sense of the cat's current temperament.
Held high, may have a slight curl forward – a sign of friendliness.
The cat is happy, content, and comfortable.
The tail may quiver or vibrate if the cat is excited.
Held low and tucked under – a sign of fear or unease.
The cat is attempting to make itself a smaller target to potential threats.
Flicking, twitching – a sign of agitation.
The cat is on high alert or is upset, and is not receptive to interaction.
Cats may also flick their tails in an oscillating, snake-like motion, or abruptly from side to side, often just before pouncing on an object or animal.
"Fluffed" or "Halloween-cat tail" –  When a cat fluffs up their tails, they are not happy.
Here, they are attempting to make themselves appear larger, warning whomever they feel unsafe with, to back off.
When cats greet another cat in their vicinity, they can do a slow, languid, long blink to communicate affection if they trust the person or animal they are in contact with.
One way to communicate love and trust to a cat is to say its name, get its attention, look it in the eyes and then slowly blink at it to emulate trust and love.
They may return the gesture.
In a study of 18 cats, the cat behavior of several half-blinks followed by a prolonged eye narrowing or eye closure was found to be a positive emotional response.
They show a specific set of feline behaviors: several half-blinks followed by prolonged eye narrowing or eye closure.
When a familiar human slow-blinks towards a cat, the cat tends to approach the human more frequently than if the human has a neutral expression that avoids eye contact.
This behavior may share features with the "genuine" human smile that involves the corners of the eyes narrowing.
A cat's ears can tell an observer what they are feeling, such as pain, fear, or when they sense danger.
At times, one may notice cats to display an ear posture commonly referred to as "airplane ears." This is when their ears are rotated to the sides or angled backward.
Cats have acute hearing, so when something scares them, their ears tend to pin to the side or back, and the further they are, the more terrified the cat is.
It can be difficult to understand what emotion the cat is portraying with their ears, especially since their ears undergo the same pattern when the cat feels they are in danger/feeling defensive, where their ears pin flat to their heads or turn back.
"Airplane" ears do not last that long, only until the moment of danger or fear is over.
When cats are in pain or feeling sick, they will hold their ears low, rotated to the side.
Cats also show feelings of playfulness and happiness when their ears are pointing forward, straight up.
This means the cat is alert and content.
Cats make themselves "smaller" when nervous or afraid, but arch their backs when they wish to appear more intimidating when they sense danger and feel defensive.
When they arch their backs, they also tend to "fluff" their tails, hence the "Halloween" cat look, known as piloerection.
More information on posture is listed below.
These behaviors are thought to be a way of marking territory.
Facial marking behavior is used to mark their territory as "safe".
The cat rubs its cheeks on prominent objects in the preferred territory, depositing a chemical pheromone, known as a contentment pheromone.
Synthetic versions of the feline facial pheromone are available commercially.
Cats have anal sacs or scent glands.
Scent is deposited on the feces as it is eliminated.
Unlike intact male cats, female and neutered male cats usually do not spray urine.
Spraying is accomplished by backing up against a vertical surface and spraying a jet of urine on that surface.
Unlike a dog's penis, a cat's penis points backward.
Males neutered in adulthood may still spray after neutering.
Urinating on horizontal surfaces in the home outside the litter box may indicate dissatisfaction with the box, due to a variety of factors such as substrate texture, cleanliness and privacy.
It can also be a sign of urinary tract problems.
Male cats on poor diets are susceptible to crystal formation in the urine, which can block the urethra and create a medical emergency.
A cat's posture communicates its emotions.
It is best to observe cats' natural behavior when they are by themselves, with humans, and with other animals.
Their postures can be friendly or aggressive, depending on the situation.
Some of the most basic and familiar cat postures include:
Relaxed posture – The cat is seen lying on the side or sitting.
Its breathing is slow to normal, with legs bent, or hind legs laid out or extended.
The tail is loosely wrapped, extended, or held up.
It also hangs down loosely when the cat is standing.
Stretching posture – another posture indicating the cat is relaxed
Yawning posture – either by itself or in conjunction with a stretch: another posture of a relaxed cat.
Alert posture – The cat is lying on its belly, or it may be sitting.
Its back is almost horizontal when standing and moving.
Its breathing is normal, with its legs bent or extended (when standing).
Its tail is curved back or straight upward, and there may be twitching while the tail is positioned downward.
Tense posture – The cat is lying on its belly, with the back of its body lower than its upper body (slinking) when standing or moving back.
Its legs, including the hind legs, are bent, and its front legs are extended when standing.
Its tail is close to the body, tensed or curled downward.
There can be twitching when the cat is standing up.
Anxious/ovulating posture – The cat is lying on its belly.
The back of the body is visibly lower than the front part when the cat is standing or moving.
Its breathing may be fast, and its legs are tucked under its body.
The tail is close to the body and may be curled forward (or close to the body when standing), with the tip of the tail moving up and down or side to side.
Fearful posture – The cat is lying on its belly or crouching directly on top of its paws.
Its entire body may be shaking and very near the ground when standing up.
Breathing is fast, with the cat's legs bent near the surface, and its tail is curled and very close to its body when standing on all fours.
Confident posture – The cat may walk around in a more comfortable manner with its tail up to the sky, indicating its importance.
Cats often walk through houses with their tail standing up high above them, making them look grander and more elegant.
Terrified posture – The cat is crouched directly on top of its paws, with visible shaking seen in some parts of the body.
Its tail is close to the body, and can be standing up, together with its hair on the back.
The legs are very stiff or even bent to increase their size.
Typically, cats avoid contact when they feel threatened, although they can resort to varying degrees of aggression when they feel cornered, or when escape is impossible.
Oral grooming for domestic and feral cats is a common behavior; studies on domestic cats show that they spend about 8% of resting time grooming themselves.
Grooming is extremely important not only to clean themselves but also to ensure ectoparasite control.
Fleas tend to be the most common ectoparasite of cats, and some studies allude to indirect evidence that grooming in cats is effective in removing fleas.
Cats do not only use their tongue for grooming to control ectoparasites; scratching may also aid in dislodging fleas from the head and neck.
Kittens "knead" the breast while suckling, using the forelimbs one at a time in an alternating pattern to push against the mammary glands to stimulate lactation in the mother.
Cats carry these infantile behaviors beyond nursing and into adulthood.
Some cats "nurse," i.e.
suck, on clothing or bedding during kneading.
The cat exerts firm downward pressure with its paw, opening its toes to expose its claws, then closes its claws as it lifts its paw.
The process takes place with alternate paws at intervals of one to two seconds.
The cat may knead while sitting on its owner's lap, which may prove painful if the cat has sharp claws.
Because most of the preferred "domestic traits" are neotenous, or juvenile traits that persist in the adult, kneading may be a relic juvenile behavior retained in adult domestic cats.
It may also stimulate the cat and make it feel good, in the same manner as a human stretching.
Kneading is often a precursor to sleeping.
Many cats purr while kneading.
They also purr mostly when newborn, when feeding, or when trying to feed on their mother's teat.
The common association between the two behaviors may corroborate the evidence in favor of the origin of kneading as a remnant instinct.
Unlike dogs, panting is a rare occurrence in cats, except in warm weather environments.
Cats may pant in response to anxiety, fear or excitement.
Panting can also be caused by play, exercise, or stress from things like car rides.
However, if panting is excessive or the cat appears in distress, it may be a symptom of a more serious condition, such as a nasal blockage, heartworm disease, head trauma, or drug poisoning.
In many cases, feline panting, especially if accompanied by other symptoms, such as coughing or shallow breathing (dyspnea), is considered to be abnormal, and should be treated as a medical emergency.
The righting reflex is the attempt of cats to land on their feet at the completion of a jump or a fall.
They can do this more easily than other animals due to their flexible spine, floating collarbone, and loose skin.
Cats also use vision and their vestibular apparatus to help tell which way to turn.
They can then stretch themselves out and relax their muscles.
The righting reflex does not always result in the cat landing on its feet.
Adult cats are able to make use of pinch-induced behavioural inhibition to induce a "freeze reflex" in their young, which enables them to be transported by the neck without resisting.
This reflex, also known as clipnosis, can also be exhibited by adults.
Cats are obligate carnivores and do not do well on herbivore diets.
In the wild they usually hunt smaller mammals to keep themselves nourished.
Many cats find and chew small quantities of long grass, but this is not for its nutritional value per se.
The eating of grass seems to stem from feline ancestry and has nothing to do with dietary requirements.
It is believed that feline ancestors instead ate grass to purge intestinal parasites.
Cats have no sweet taste receptors on their tongue and thus cannot taste sweet things at all.
Cats mainly smell for their food, and what they taste for is amino acids instead.
This may be a cause of cats being diagnosed with diabetes.
The food that domestic cats get has a lot of carbohydrates in it, and a high sugar content cannot be efficiently processed by the digestive system of cats.
Cats drink water by lapping the surface with their tongue.
A fraction of a teaspoon of water is taken up with each lap.
Although some desert cats are able to obtain much of their water needs through the flesh of their prey, most cats come to bodies of water to drink.
Eating patterns are another indicator to understand behavior changes in domestic cats.
Changes in typical eating patterns can be an early signal for possible physical or psychological health problems.
A cat's eating pattern in a domestic setting is essential for the cat and owner bond to form.
This happens because cats form attachments to households that regularly feed them.
Some cats ask for food dozens of times a day, including at night, with rubbing, pacing, meowing, or sometimes loud purring.
Cats are crepuscular, which means they are most active at dawn and dusk.
More than half of cats sleep between 12 and 18 hours a day, sometimes even more.
Most cats sleep more as they age.
Domestic cats seem to be comparatively flexible with regard to the times of day and night they are active or asleep.
Cats tend to bury their feces after defecating and can be attracted to a litter box if it has attractant in it.
Cats will also generally defecate more in those litter boxes.
Socialization is defined as a member of a specific group learning to be part of that group.
It is said to be a continuous learning process that allows an individual to learn the necessary skills and behaviors required for a particular social position.
Cats, domestic or wild, do participate in social behaviors, even though it is thought that most cat species (besides lions) are solitary, anti-social animals.
Under certain circumstances, such as food availability, shelter, or protection, cats can be seen in groups.
The social behaviors that cats participate in are colony organization, social learning, socialization between cats, and socialization with humans.
Free-living domestic cats tend to form colonies.
Small colonies consist of one female, known as a queen, and her kittens.
Large colonies consist of several queens and their kittens.
Male cats are present in both types of colonies and serve the purpose of reproduction and defending territory.
Reciprocal altruism occurs within these colonies.
This means that if an expecting queen helps another queen that just gave birth, then the helping queen will get help in return when she gives birth.
Although free living cats are found in colonies, stable social order, like that of the lion, does not exist.
Free living cats usually are found in colonies for protection against predators, and for food availability.
Although there are many advantages of group living, such as easy access to mates, and defensive measures to protect food, there are also disadvantages, such as sexual competition for mates.
If the group gets too big, fights may break out over food.
Cats are observational learners.
This type of learning emerges early in a cat's life, and has been shown in many laboratory studies.
Young kittens learn to hunt from their mothers by observing their techniques when catching prey.
The mother ensures that her kittens learn hunting techniques by first bringing dead prey to the litter, then live prey.
She demonstrates the techniques required for successful capture to her kittens by bringing live prey to the litter for the kittens to catch themselves.
Prey-catching behavior of kittens improves over time when mothers are present.
Observational learning for cats can be described in terms of the drive to complete the behavior, the cue that initiates the behavior, the response to the cue, and the reward for completing the behavior.
This is shown when cats learn predatory behavior from their mothers.
The drive is hunger, the cue is the prey, the response is to catch the prey, and the reward is to relieve the hunger sensation.
Kittens also show observational learning when they are socializing with humans.
They are more likely to initiate socialization with humans when their mothers are exhibiting non-aggressive and non-defensive behaviors.
Even though mothers spend most time with their kittens, male cats play an important role by breaking up fights among litter mates.
Observational learning is not limited to kittens.
It can also be observed during adulthood.
Studies have been done with adult cats performing a task, such as pressing a lever after a visual cue.
Adult cats that see others performing a task learn to perform the same task faster than those who did not witness another cat performing it.
When strange cats meet, they ideally cautiously allow each other to smell their hindquarters, but this does not happen very often.
Usually when strange cats meet, one cat makes a sudden movement that puts the other cat into a defensive mode.
The subordinate cat will then draw in on itself and prepare to attack if needed.
If an attack happens, the subordinate cat will usually run away, but this does not happen all the time and it could lead to a tomcat duel.
Dominance is also seen as an underlying factor for how conspecifics – members of the same species – interact with each other.
Dominance can be seen among cats in multi-cat households.
It can be seen when other cats submit to the dominant cat.
Dominance includes such behaviors as the subordinate cat walking around the dominant cat, waiting for the dominant cat to walk past, avoiding eye contact, crouching, lying on its side (defensive posture), and retreating when the dominant cat approaches.
The dominant cat presents a specific body posture as well.
Its ears are  straight up, the base of its tail is arched, and it looks directly at the subordinate cat.
Dominant cats are usually not aggressive, but if a subordinate cat blocks food they may become aggressive.
When this aggressive behavior occurs, it can also lead to the dominant cat preventing subordinate cats from eating and using the litter box.
This can cause the subordinate cat to defecate somewhere else and create problems with human interaction.
Social conflicts among cats depend solely on the behavior of the cats.
Some research has shown that cats rarely pick fights, but when they do, it's usually for protecting food and/or litters, and defending territory.
The first sign of an imminent tomcat duel is when both cats draw themselves up high on their legs, all hair along the middle of their backs stands straight up, and they mew and howl loudly as they approach each other.
The steps the cats make become slower and shorter the closer they get to each other.
Once they are close enough to attack, they pause slightly, and then one cat leaps and tries to bite the nape of the other cat.
The other cat has no choice but to retaliate, and both cats roll aggressively on the ground, with loud and intense screams by both.
After some time the cats separate and stand face to face to begin the attack all over again.
This can go on for some time until one cat does not get up again and remains seated.
The defeated cat does not move until the victor has completed a sniff of the area and moves outside the fighting area.
Once this happens, the defeated cat leaves the area, ending the duel.
Females may also fight with each other, and male-female fights can occur as well.
Cats may need to be reintroduced or separated to avoid fights in a closed household.
One way cats and humans interact is through  "headbutting," in which a cat rubs its head on a human in order to leave its scent to claim territory and create a bond.
Cats can sometimes take cues from human pointing and from the direction of human gazes.
They can sometimes discriminate between, and sometimes even correlate, human facial expressions, attentional states, and voices.
Besides its own name, a cat can sometimes learn the names of humans and other cats.
Cats aged three to nine weeks are sensitive to human socialization; after this period socialization can be less effective.
Studies have shown that the earlier a kitten is handled, the less fearful it will be toward humans.
Other factors that can enhance socialization are having many people handle the kitten frequently, the presence of the mother, and feeding.
The presence of the mother is important because cats are observational learners.
If the mother is comfortable around humans, it can reduce anxiety in the kitten and promote the kitten-human relationship.
Feral kittens around two to seven weeks old can be socialized, usually within a month of capture.
Some species of cats cannot be socialized toward humans because of factors such as genetic influence and in some cases specific learning experiences.
The best way to get a kitten to socialize is to handle it for many hours a week.
The process is made easier if there is another socialized cat present but not necessarily in the same space as the feral cat.
If the handler can get a cat to urinate in the litter tray, then the others in a litter will usually follow.
Initial contact with thick gloves is highly recommended until trust is established, usually within the first week.
Socializing an adult is challenging.
Socialized adult feral cats tend to trust only those they trusted in their socialization period, and can be very fearful around strangers.
Cats can be companion animals.
Studies have shown that these cats provide many physiological and psychological benefits for the owner.
Other aspects of cat behavior that are deemed advantageous for the human-cat bond are cat hygiene (cats are known for good hygiene) and they do not have to be taken outside (use of the litter box).
Cats are perfect for smaller spaces, and they have no problems with being left alone for extended periods.
Even though there are a number of benefits of owning a cat, there are a number of problematic behaviors that can affect the human-cat relationship.
One behavior is when cats attack people by clawing and biting.
This often occurs spontaneously or is triggered by sudden movements.
Another problematic behavior is the "petting and biting syndrome", which involves the cat being petted and then suddenly attacking and running away.
Other problems are house soiling, scratching furniture, and when a cat brings dead prey into the house.
There are 52 measured personality traits in cats, with one study saying "five reliable personality factors were found using principal axis factor analysis: neuroticism, extroversion, dominance, impulsiveness and agreeableness." This study asked cat owners to rate their pets on 52 personality traits using a survey.
Descriptions of the main 5 personality traits that were found can be summarized as follows:
Neuroticism: shy, stressed, anxious, insecure, tense.
Cats falling into this category may like hiding places and quiet areas within the home.
Extroversion: active, curious, inventive, smart, vigilant.
Cats falling into this category may like extra toys and sensory items to prevent boredom and room to run.
Dominance: bullying, aggressive, dominant.
Cats in this category may need to be the only cat or pet in a household to prevent harm or injury.
Impulsiveness: reckless, erratic, impulsive.
Cats in this category may need a calmer environment with predictable routines.
Agreeableness: affectionate, friendly, gentle.
Cats that fall in this category are typically well-adjusted and happy.
Cats are natural predators.
When allowed to roam outdoors, many cats will engage in predation on wildlife, as they are a serious threat to wildlife species.
Understanding an indoor cat's personality can go a long way toward satisfying their instincts and avoid potentially inconvenient behavior (such as sudden hissing, dashing around the house, or climbing the curtains).
Environmental enrichment items include:
A good-sized cat tree, with scratching posts
Toys that provide a release for their predatory instincts
A well kept litter box or toilet
Fresh water and dry cat food
Attack/Hunting Behavior
Although they are natural predators, pet cats tend to only hunt what is most available to them, around where they live.
So, if moved to different areas, they can switch between prey depending on their availability.
When cats encounter prey, they try to make themselves as quiet and as small as possible, to avoid their prey running from them.
Before pouncing at the prey, they push their behinds up into the air and "shake" them with their head low to the ground and paws in front of them so that they can prepare for dismount, or to pounce at their prey.
The cat remains extremely tense before springing forward to strike their prey with their paws.
When they have difficult access to their prey, such as in small pools of water or holes, they use their paws to "fish" out their food and reach into such areas effectively.
When cats finally have control of their food, they tend to cuff or push the prey about, almost playfully.
Cats also do something known as "prey shaking" which includes holding their prey in their mouths, and shaking their heads to successfully kill or disorient their prey.
If their prey is not dead after this, one or two bites will do.
Post Hunting Behavior
When their prey is finally dead, they bite them for quite some time, up and down the length of the body.
During this time they are picked up and held in their mouths.
They chew and pull at their prey using their molars, for grinding.
They start at the anterior end of the animal, near its head, enabling them to eat their smaller prey in as fast as one minute.
They eat in a crouched position, holding down the victim with their paw(s).
Note that while they attack, they do not bite off pieces of the prey until they are dead.
Cats like to organize their environment based on their needs.
Like their ancestors, domestic cats still have an inherent desire to maintain an independent territory but are generally content to live with other cats for company as they easily get bored.
Living alone for a longer time may cause them to forget how to communicate with other cats.
Sometimes adding a kitten to a household can be a bad idea.
If there already is an older cat present and another cat is added, it may be better to get another older cat that has been socialized with other cats.
When a kitten is introduced to a mature cat, that cat may show feline asocial aggression, in which they feel threatened and act aggressive to drive off the intruder.
If this happens, the kitten and the cat should be separated and slowly introduced by rubbing towels on the animals and presenting the towel to the other.
Cats use scent and pheromones to help organize their territory by marking prominent objects.
If these objects or scents are removed, it upsets the cat's perception of its environment.
"What Your Cat's Body Language Is Saying".
Retrieved 1 December 2018.
A kitten is a juvenile cat.
After being born, kittens display primary altriciality and are fully dependent on their mothers for survival.
They normally do not open their eyes for seven to ten days.
After about two weeks, kittens develop quickly and begin to explore the world beyond their nest.
After a further three to four weeks, they begin to eat solid food and grow baby teeth.
Domestic kittens are highly social animals and usually enjoy human companionship.
The word "kitten" derives from the Middle English word kitoun, which in turn came from the Old French chitoun or cheton.
Juvenile big cats are called "cubs" rather than kittens.
For the young of smaller wild felids, such as ocelots, caracals, and lynxes, either term may be used, though "kitten" is more common.
A feline litter usually consists of two to five kittens, but litters with one to more than ten are known.
Kittens are typically born after a gestation lasting between 64 and 67 days, with an average length of 66 days.
When they are born, kittens emerge in a sac called the amnion, which is bitten off and eaten by the mother cat.
For the first several weeks, kittens cannot urinate or defecate without being stimulated by their mother.
They also cannot regulate their body temperature for the first three weeks, so kittens born in temperatures less than 27 °C (81 °F) can die from hypothermia if their mother does not keep them warm.
The mother's milk is very important for the kittens' nutrition and proper growth.
This milk transfers antibodies to the kittens, which helps protect them against infectious diseases.
As mentioned above, they cannot urinate, so they have a very high requirement for fluids.
Kittens open their eyes about seven to ten days after birth.
At first, the retina is poorly developed and vision is poor.
Kittens cannot see as well as adult cats until about ten weeks after birth.
Kittens develop very quickly from about two weeks of age until their seventh week.
Their coordination and strength improve, and they play-fight with their littermates and begin to explore the world outside the nest or den.
They learn to wash themselves and others as well as play hunting and stalking games, showing their inborn ability as predators; the kittens' mother or other adult cats help develop these innate skills by bringing live prey to the nest.
Later, the mother demonstrates hunting techniques for the kittens to emulate.
As they reach three to four weeks old, the kittens are gradually weaned and begin to eat solid food, with weaning usually complete by six to eight weeks.
Kittens generally begin to lose their baby teeth around three months of age, and they have a complete set of adult teeth by nine months.
Kittens live primarily on solid food after weaning, but they usually continue to suckle from time to time until separated from their mothers.
Some mother cats will scatter their kittens as early as three months of age, while others continue to look after them until they approach sexual maturity.
The sex of kittens is usually easy to determine at birth.
By six to eight weeks, this becomes harder because of the growth of fur in the genital region.
The male's urethral opening is round, whereas the female's urethral opening is a slit.
Another marked difference is the distance between anus and urethral opening, which is greater in males than in females.
Kittens are very social and spend most of their waking hours interacting with other animals and playing on their own.
Play with other kittens peaks in the third or fourth month after birth, with more solitary hunting and stalking play peaking later, at about five months.
Kittens are vulnerable because they like to find dark places to hide, sometimes with fatal results if they are not watched carefully.
Cats have a habit of seeking refuge under or inside cars or on top of car tires during stormy or cold weather; this often leads to broken bones, burns, heat stroke, damaged internal organs or death.
Domestic kittens are commonly sent to new homes at six to eight weeks of age, but it has been suggested that being with their mother and littermates from six to twelve weeks is important for a kitten's social and behavioural development.
Usually, breeders and foster/rescue homes will not sell or adopt out a kitten that is younger than twelve weeks.
In many jurisdictions, it is illegal to give away kittens younger than eight weeks of age.
Kittens generally reach sexual maturity at around seven months, and full "adulthood" around one year of age.
Domestic kittens in developed societies are usually vaccinated against common illnesses from two to three months of age.
The usual combination vaccination protects against feline viral rhinotracheitis (FVR), feline calicivirus (C), and feline panleukopenia (P).
This FVRCP inoculation is usually given at eight, twelve, and sixteen weeks, and an inoculation against rabies may be given at sixteen weeks.
Kittens are usually spayed or neutered at seven months of age, but kittens may be neutered as young as seven weeks (if large enough), especially in animal shelters.
Such early neutering does not appear to have any long-term health risks for cats, and it may even be beneficial in male cats.
Kittens are commonly given deworming treatments for roundworms from about four weeks.
Felines are carnivores and have adapted to animal-based diets and low carbohydrate inclusion.
Kittens belong to the growth life stage and have high energy and protein requirements.
When feeding a kitten, it is often recommended to use highly digestible ingredients and a variety of components to support development and ensure a healthy adult cat.
In North America, diets certified by the Association of American Feed Control Officials (AAFCO) are accepted as adequate nutrition; therefore, kitten diets should be AAFCO-approved to guarantee complete supplementation.
Key components of the diet are high fat content to meet caloric requirements of growth, high protein to promote muscle growth, and supplementation of certain nutrients such as docosahexaenoic acid to support brain development and the optimization of cognition.
Part of the kitten's immune system is the mucosal immune system, which is within the gastrointestinal tract.
The mucosal immune system is largely responsible for coordinating proper immune responses by tolerating innocuous antigens and attacking foreign pathogens.
In order to optimize kitten health and increase chances of survival, it is important to optimize the link between the gut-associated lymphoid tissue and the microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract.
Lasting health and longevity can be promoted partly through proper nutrition, as well as by establishing a healthy gut from birth through the use of colostrum.
Within the first two days after birth, kittens acquire passive immunity from their mother's milk.
Milk within the first few days of parturition is called colostrum and contains high concentrations of immunoglobulins.
These include immunoglobulin A and immunoglobulin G, which cross the neonatal intestinal barrier.
The immunoglobulins and growth factors found in the colostrum begin to establish and strengthen the weak immune system of the offspring.
Kittens are able to chew solid food around 5–6 weeks after birth, and it is recommended that 30% of their diet consist of solid food at this time.
The kitten remains on the mother's milk until around eight weeks of age, when weaning is complete and solid food becomes the primary food source.
Until approximately one year of age, kittens are in a growth phase during which energy requirements can be up to 2.5 times higher than maintenance.
Pet nutritionists often suggest offering a commercial cat food designed specifically for kittens starting at four weeks of age.
Fat has a higher caloric value than carbohydrates and protein, supplying 9 kcal/g.
The growing kitten requires arachidonic and linoleic acid, which can be provided in omega−3 fatty acids.
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is another vital nutrient that can be supplied through omega−3 fatty acids.
Addition of DHA to the diet benefits the cognition, brain, and visual development of kittens.
Cats are natural carnivores and require high amounts of protein in the diet.
Since kittens are in a growth phase, they need substantial levels of protein to supply essential amino acids for the development of tissues and muscles.
It is recommended that kittens consume a diet containing approximately 30% protein, on a dry matter basis, for proper growth.
Taurine is an essential amino acid found only in animal tissue; the mother cat cannot produce enough of it for her kittens.
As it is an indispensable amino acid, it must be provided exogenously through the diet at 10 mg per kg of bodyweight, each day.
Taurine deficiency can lead to poor growth in kittens, and it can cause retinal degeneration in cats.
Felines are natural carnivores and do not intentionally consume large quantities of carbohydrates.
The domestic cat's liver has adapted to the lack of carbohydrates in the diet by using amino acids to produce glucose, which fuels the brain and other tissues.
Studies have shown that carbohydrate digestion in young kittens is much less effective than that of a mature feline with a developed gastrointestinal tract.
Highly digestible carbohydrates found in commercial kitten food provide additional energy and fiber to stimulate the immature gut tissue.
Soluble fiber such as beet pulp is commonly used as a stool hardener and has been shown to strengthen intestinal muscles and thicken the gut mucosal layer, helping to prevent diarrhea.
The lack of readily available glucose from the limited carbohydrates in the diet has resulted in the liver adapting to produce glucose from the breakdown components of protein — amino acids.
The enzymes that break down amino acids are constantly active in cats.
Thus, cats need a constant source of protein in their diet.
Because they are constantly growing, kittens require an increased amount of protein to supply readily available amino acids for daily maintenance and for building new body components.
There are many required amino acids for kittens.
A dietary level of approximately 0.3% histidine is necessary for kittens since histidine-free diets cause weight loss.
Tryptophan is required at about 0.15% as this level maximizes performance in kittens.
Kittens also need the following amino acids supplemented in their diet: arginine to avoid an excess of ammonia in the blood — otherwise known as hyperammonemia, isoleucine, leucine, valine, lysine, methionine as a sulfur-containing amino acid, asparagine for maximal growth in the early post-weaning kitten, threonine, and taurine to prevent central retinal degeneration.
Vitamin A is required in kitten diets because cats cannot convert carotenes to retinol in the intestinal mucosa due to a lack of the necessary enzyme; therefore, this vitamin must be supplied in the diet.
Vitamin E is another required vitamin in kitten diets; deficiency leads to steatitis, causing the depot fat to become firm and yellow-orange in colour, which is painful and leads to death.
Also, vitamin D is essential because cats cannot convert it from precursors in the skin.
Cats can synthesize niacin, but its breakdown exceeds the rate at which it can be synthesized, so they have a higher requirement for it, which can be fulfilled through an animal-based diet.
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) is required in increased amounts because it is essential for amino acid metabolism.
Vitamin B12 is an AAFCO-recommended vitamin that is essential for the metabolism of carbohydrates and protein, supports the nervous system and mucous membranes, contributes to muscle and heart function, and promotes normal growth and development.
Choline is also an AAFCO-recommended ingredient for kittens; it is important for neurotransmission in the brain and serves as a component of membrane phospholipids.
Biotin (vitamin B7) is another AAFCO-recommended vitamin that supports the thyroid and adrenal glands as well as the reproductive and nervous systems.
Kittens also require riboflavin (vitamin B2) for heart health, pantothenic acid (vitamin B5), and folacin (vitamin B9).
Since kitten diets are very high in calories, ingredients must be implemented to ensure adequate digestion and utilization of these calories.
Choline chloride is an ingredient that maintains fat metabolism.
Biotin and niacin are also active in the metabolism of fats, carbs, and protein.
Riboflavin is also necessary for the digestion of fats and carbohydrates.
These are the main metabolic aids incorporated into kitten diets to maximize nutrient utilization.
A combination of essential nutrients is used to satisfy the overall growth and development of the kitten's body.
Nonetheless, many ingredients that kittens do not require are also included in diet formulations to promote healthy growth and development; these ingredients include: dried egg as a source of high-quality protein and fatty acids, flax seeds — which are rich in omega−3 fatty acids and aid in digestion, calcium carbonate as a source of calcium, and calcium pantothenate (vitamin B5) — which acts as a coenzyme in the conversion of amino acids and is important for healthy skin.
Antioxidants help support the development of a healthy immune system by preventing the oxidation of essential molecules in a growing kitten.
Antioxidants in kitten diets can be derived from plant ingredients such as carrots, sweet potatoes, and spinach, as well as from dietary supplements like vitamin E and zinc proteinate.
Kittens require a high-calorie diet that contains more protein than the diet of adult cats.
Young orphaned kittens require cat milk every two to four hours, and they need physical stimulation to defecate and urinate.
Cat milk replacer is manufactured to feed young kittens because cow's milk does not provide all the necessary nutrients.
Human-reared kittens tend to be very affectionate with humans as adults and sometimes more dependent on them than kittens reared by their mothers, but they can also show volatile mood swings and aggression.
Depending on the age at which they were orphaned and how long they were without their mothers, these kittens may be severely underweight and can have health problems later in life, such as heart conditions.
The compromised immune system of orphaned kittens — due to the absence of antibodies normally found in the mother's milk — can make them especially susceptible to infections, often necessitating antibiotics.
Bönisch, Susanne (1996).
Natural Healing for Cats.
Sterling Publishing Company.
ISBN 978-0-8069-8122-2.
Casal, Margret; Jezyk, Peter; Giger, Urs (1996).
"Transfer of Colostral Antibodies From Queens to Their Kittens".
American Journal of Veterinary Research.
doi:10.2460/ajvr.1996.57.11.1653.
Crowell-Davis, Sharon (2005).
"Cat Behaviour: Social Organization, Communication and Development".
doi:10.1007/1-4020-3227-7_1.
Guilford, Grant (1994).
"Nutritional Management of Gastrointestinal Tract Diseases of Dogs and Cats".
Journal of Nutrition.
124 (12 Suppl): 2663S–2669S.
doi:10.1093/jn/124.suppl_12.2663S.
"Behaviour Problems and Welfare".
doi:10.1007/1-4020-3227-7_4.
McHattie, Grace (1993).
A Compendium of Feline Facts.
ISBN 978-0-7153-0126-5.
Messonnier, Shawn (2010).
Natural Health Bible for Dogs & Cats: Your A-Z Guide to Over 200 Conditions, Herbs, Vitamins, and Supplements.
Crown/Archetype Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-307-55860-2.
Olson, Patricia; Kustritz, Margaret; Johnston, Shirley (2001).
"Early-age Neutering of Dogs and Cats in the United States".
Journal of Reproduction and Fertility Supplement.
Poirier, Frank; Hussey, Kaye (1982).
"Nonhuman Primate Learning: The Importance of Learning from an Evolutionary Perspective".
Anthropology & Education Quarterly.
doi:10.1525/aeq.1982.13.2.05x1830j.
Spain, Victor; Scarlett, Janet; Houpt, Katherine (2004).
"Long-term Risks and Benefits of Early-age Gonadectomy in Cats".
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association.
doi:10.2460/javma.2004.224.372.
Sturgess, Kit; Hurley, Karyl (2005).
"Nutrition and Welfare".
doi:10.1007/1-4020-3227-7_9.
Sunquist, Fiona; Sunquist, Mel (2014).
The Wild Cat Book: Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Cats.
ISBN 978-0-226-14576-1.
Tootle, John; Friedlander, Michael (1989).
"Postnatal Development of the Spatial Contrast Sensitivity of X- and Y-cells in the Kittens Retinogeniculate Pathway".
The Journal of Neuroscience.
Journal of Neuroscience: 1325–1340.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.09-04-01325.1989.
Tsutsui, Toshihiko; Stabenfeldt, George (1993).
"Biology of Ovarian Cycles, Pregnancy and Pseudo Pregnancy in the Domestic Cat".
Journal of Reproduction and Fertility Supplement.
Vandivert, Rita (1975).
Understanding Animals as Pets.
Illustrated Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-7232-6118-6.
Kittens as a New Pet.
ISBN 978-0-86622-614-1.
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice.
ISBN 978-0-32337-185-8.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: publisher location (link)
"How to Raise Orphaned Kittens".
Archived from the original on 15 July 2011.
Retrieved 7 March 2011.
"Kittens Deaths ('Fading Kittens')".
International Cat Care.
Archived from the original on 13 April 2016.
Retrieved 28 March 2015.
Archived from the original on July 18, 2012.
Retrieved 15 September 2005.
"When Does a Kitten Become a Cat?".
Retrieved 12 October 2013.
"When Do Puppies and Kittens Lose Their Baby Teeth?".
Archived from the original on 11 February 2017.
Retrieved 1 November 2013.
Timetable of kitten development (weeks 1 to 8)
The health of domestic cats is a well studied area in veterinary medicine.
Topics include infectious and genetic diseases, diet and nutrition and non-therapeutic surgical procedures such as neutering and declawing.
An infectious disease is caused by the presence of pathogenic organisms such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, or parasites (either animalian or protozoan).
Most of these diseases can spread from cat to cat via airborne pathogens or through direct or indirect contact, while others require a vector such as a tick or mosquito.
Certain infectious diseases are a concern from a public health standpoint because they are a Feline zoonosis and transmittable to humans.
Viral diseases in cats can be serious, especially in catteries and kennels.
Timely vaccination can reduce the risk and severity of an infection.
The most commonly recommended viruses to vaccinate cats against are:
Feline herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1), a viral cause of feline viral rhinotracheitis, a respiratory infection of cats.
Feline calicivirus (FCV), a common viral cause of respiratory infection in cats.
Feline parvovirus, which causes feline panleukopenia (FPV), more commonly known as feline distemper.
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), a retrovirus.
Rabies, a fatal disease transmitted by the bite of an infected mammal.
In the United States, cats make up 4.6% of reported cases of rabies infected animals.
Viruses for which there are no vaccines:
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), a lentivirus and genetic relative of HIV.
There is no approved vaccine for FIV in North America.
Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV), a mutation of feline enteric coronavirus (FECV/FeCoV) that causes feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), a fatal incurable disease.
See: Global spread of H5N1#Felidae (cats)
Malassezia pachydermatis
Veterinary parasitology studies both external and internal parasites in animals.
External parasites, such as fleas, mites, ticks and mosquitoes can cause skin irritation, and are also often carriers of other diseases or of internal parasites.
Ear mites and other mites can cause skin problems such as mange.
Ticks, fleas, and mosquitoes often carry multiple blood-borne diseases.
Domestic cats are affected by over 250 naturally occurring hereditary disorders, many of which are similar to those in humans, such as diabetes, hemophilia and Tay–Sachs disease.
For example, Abyssinian cat's pedigree contains a genetic mutation that causes retinitis pigmentosa, which also affects humans.
Familial renal disease is inherited in Abyssinians and Persians
Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Heart valve dysplasia
Found in Persians and Himalayans.
Flat-chested kitten syndrome
Skin disorders are among the most common health problems in cats and have many causes.
The condition of a cat's skin and coat can be an important indicator of its general health.
Cheyletiellosis is a mild dermatitis caused by mites of the genus Cheyletiella.
It is also known as walking dandruff due to skin scales being carried by the mites.
Feline eosinophilic granuloma
Flea allergy dermatitis
Miliary dermatitis (feline eczema)
Nutritional skin disorders
Cerebellar hypoplasia is a disorder found in cats and dogs in which the cerebellum is not completely mature at birth.
Cerebellar hypoplasia causes jerky movements, tremors and generally uncoordinated motion.
The animal often falls down and has trouble walking.
Tremors increase when the animal is excited and subside when at ease.
A corneal ulcer is an inflammatory condition of the cornea involving loss of its outer layer.
It is very common in dogs and is sometimes seen in cats.
Feline hyperaldosteronism
Feline hyperthyroidism
Epilepsy is characterized by recurrent unprovoked seizures.
Epilepsy in cats is rare likely because there is no hereditary component to epilepsy in cats.
Feline hepatic lipidosis also known as Feline Fatty Liver Syndrome, is one of the most common forms of liver disease of cats.
The disease begins when the cat stops eating from a loss of appetite, forcing the liver to convert body fat into usable energy.
Feline lower urinary tract disease is a term that is used to cover many problems of the feline urinary tract, including stones and cystitis.
The term feline urologic syndrome is an older term which is still sometimes used for this condition.
It is a common disease in adult cats, though it can strike in young cats too.
It may present as any of a variety of urinary tract problems, and can lead to a complete blockage of the urinary system, which if left untreated is fatal.
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesion
Feline spongiform encephalopathy
Uterine unicornis a condition in which the female cat is missing a uterine horn.
A rare discovery by veterinarians, the condition can be detected by x-ray or ultrasound prior to spaying if the patient has a family history of the medical condition.
There is no known scientific study to prove that uterine unicornis is a hereditary genetic disorder.
In some cases, the patient may also be missing a kidney on the same side as its missing uterine horn.
This phenomenon is also called unilateral renal agenesis.
Researchers at the University of Cornell Feline Health Center believe that "most zoonotic diseases pose minimal threat" to humans.
However some humans are particularly at risk.
These are people "with immature or weakened immune systems" (infants, the elderly, people undergoing cancer therapy, and individuals with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome).
Some common and preventable forms of zoonosis are as follows:
Vaccinations are an important preventive animal health measure.
The specific vaccinations recommended for cats varies depending on geographic location, environment, travel history, and the activities the animal frequently engages in.
In the United States, regardless of any of these factors, it is usually highly recommended that cats be vaccinated against rabies, feline herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1), feline calicivirus (FCV), and feline panleukopenia virus (FPV).
The decision on whether to vaccinate against other diseases should be made between an owner and a veterinarian, taking into account factors specific to the cat.
Feline diseases such as FeLV, FIV, and feline heartworm can be detected during a routine visit to a veterinarian.
A variety of tests exist that can detect feline illnesses, and with early detection most diseases can be managed effectively.
Once-a-month topical products or ingestible pills are the most commonly used products to kill and prevent future parasite infestations.
Veterinarians commonly recommend commercial cat foods that are formulated to address the specific nutritional requirements of cats, although an increasing number of owners are opting for home-prepared cooked or raw diets.
Although cats are obligate carnivores, vegetarian and vegan cat food are preferred by owners uncomfortable with feeding animal products to their pets.
Food and Drug Administration Center for Veterinary Medicine has come out against vegetarian cat and dog food for health reasons.
Cats require high levels of taurine in their diet.
Taurine is an organic acid found in animal tissues.
It is a major constituent of bile and can be found in the large intestine.
Taurine has many  biological roles, such as conjugation of bile acids, antioxidation, membrane stabilization, and modulation of calcium signaling.
It is essential for cardiovascular function in cats, as well as the development and function of skeletal muscle, the retinas, and the central nervous system.
Although meat protein can be substituted with vegetable proteins, vegetable proteins do not provide a sufficiency of the specific amino acids which are vital for a cat's body to function.
Cats can be selective eaters.
Although it is extremely rare for a cat to deliberately starve itself to the point of injury, in obese cats, the sudden loss of weight can cause a fatal condition called feline hepatic lipidosis, a liver dysfunction which causes pathological loss of appetite and reinforces the starvation, which can lead to death within as little as 48 hours.
Pica is a condition in which animals chew or eat unusual things such as fabric, plastic or wool.
In cats, this can be fatal or require surgical removal if a large amount of foreign material is ingested (for example, an entire sock).
It tends to occur more often in Burmese, Oriental, and Siamese breeds.
Food allergy is a non-seasonal disease with skin and/or gastrointestinal disorders.
The main complaint is pruritus.
The exact prevalence of food allergy in cats remains unknown.
There is no breed, sex or age predilection, although some breeds are commonly affected.
Before the onset of clinical signs, the animals have been fed the offending food components for at least two years, although some animals are less than a year old.
In 20 to 30% of the cases, cats have concurrent allergic diseases (atopy / flea-allergic dermatitis).
A reliable diagnosis can only be made with an elimination diet.
Challenge–dechallenge–rechallenge is necessary for the identification of the causative food component(s).
Therapy consists of avoiding the offending food component(s).
Cats with food allergies may present with red, hairless, and scabby skin.
Hair loss usually occurs on the face and/or anus.
Depending on the severity of the reaction, it may take two weeks to three months for a cat to recover once the offending allergen is removed.
A number of common human foods and household ingestibles are toxic to cats, including chocolate solids, onion, garlic, avocados, grapes, raisins, coffee, tomato and tomato leaves, and milk.
Phenolic compounds such as those in TCP are harmful to cats.
Malnutrition in cats is currently uncommon due to complete and balanced diets being formulated and fed.
Yet it can still occur if the cat's food intake decreases beyond what the food can provide, if interactions occur between ingredients or nutrients, if mistakes are made during formulation or manufacturing, and if the food is stored for a lengthy amount of time.
If a cat becomes malnourished, a deficiency of energy, protein, taurine, essential fatty acids, minerals (calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, sodium, potassium), vitamins (A, D, E, thiamine, niacin, biotin), and trace elements (iron, copper, zinc, iodine, selenium) can occur, causing a multitude of deficiency symptoms.
For information about a correct cat diet, see Cat food.
One of the cat diseases caused by malnutrition is central retinal deficiency, a dysfunction in cats that can be hereditary as well.
The retina, a thin layer of tissue in the back of the eye, is the structure affected by this disorder.
This structure receives the light gathered and focused from the lens.
It essentially takes light and converts it into electrical nerve signals that the brain interprets as vision.
The retina contains rods and cones, which are photo-receptors that help the animal see (rods) and visualize certain colors (cones).
Retinal degeneration can be caused by a taurine deficiency, which is why many cat foods are supplemented with taurine.
Central retinal deficiency is irreversible, but its effects can be significantly hindered if a diet supplemented with adequate amounts of taurine is provided.
Vitamin deficiencies in A and E can also lead to retinal degeneration in cats.
Neutering and overfeeding have contributed to increased obesity in domestic cats, especially in developed countries.
Obesity in cats has similar effects as in humans, and will increase the risk of heart disease, diabetes mellitus, etc., thereby shortening the cat's lifespan.
Spaying and neutering
Onychectomy (declawing)
The ASPCA lists some common sources of toxins that pets encounter, including: plants, human medications and cosmetics, cleaning products, and even foods.
Some houseplants are harmful to cats.
For example, the leaves of the Easter lily can cause permanent and life-threatening kidney damage to cats, and Philodendron are also poisonous to cats.
The Cat Fanciers' Association has a full list of plants harmful to cats.
Paracetamol or acetaminophen (trade name Panadol and Tylenol) is extremely toxic to cats, and should not be given to them under any circumstances.
Cats lack the necessary glucuronyl transferase enzymes to safely break paracetamol down and minute portions of a normal tablet for humans may prove fatal.
Initial symptoms include vomiting, salivation and discolouration of the tongue and gums.
After around two days, liver damage is evident, typically giving rise to jaundice.
Unlike an overdose in humans, it is rarely liver damage that is the cause of death; instead, methaemoglobin formation and the production of Heinz bodies in red blood cells inhibit oxygen transport by the blood, causing asphyxiation.
Effective treatment is occasionally possible for small doses, but must be extremely rapid.
Salicylates, such as aspirin, can cause toxicosis when administered improperly.
Similarly, application of minoxidil (Rogaine) to the skin of cats, either accidentally or by well-meaning owners attempting to counter loss of fur, has sometimes proved fatal.
In addition to such obvious dangers as insecticides and weed killers, other common household substances that should be used with caution in areas where cats may be exposed include mothballs and other naphthalene products, as well as phenol-based products often used for cleaning and disinfecting near cats' feeding areas or litter boxes, such as Pine-Sol, Dettol (Lysol), hexachlorophene, etc.
which, although they are widely used without problem, have been sometimes seen to be fatal.
Essential oils are toxic to cats and there have been reported cases of serious illnesses caused by tea tree oil and tea tree oil-based flea treatments and shampoos.
Many human foods are somewhat toxic to cats; theobromine in chocolate can cause theobromine poisoning, for instance, although few cats will eat chocolate.
Toxicity in cats ingesting relatively large amounts of onions or garlic has also been reported.
Cats may be poisoned by many chemicals usually considered safe by their human guardians, because their livers are less effective at some forms of detoxification.
Some of the most common causes of poisoning in cats are antifreeze and rodent baits.
Cats may be particularly sensitive to environmental pollutants.
Cats can succumb quickly from ethylene glycol poisoning, after ingesting as little as one teaspoon.
The primary source of ethylene glycol is automotive antifreeze or radiator coolant, where concentrations are high.
Other sources of antifreeze include windshield deicing agents, brake fluid, motor oil, developing solutions for hobby photographers, wood stains, solvents, and paints.
Some people put antifreeze into their cabin's toilet to prevent it from freezing during the winter, resulting in toxicities when animals drink from the toilet.
Small amounts of antifreeze may be contained in ornaments such as snow globes.
A cat suspected of having ingested ethylene glycol requires immediate veterinary treatment, to receive an antidote within three hours.
The earlier the treatment is started, the greater the chance of survival.
A cat's life span can depend on various factors such as diet, exercise, sex, breed, living conditions, and other factors that can change the length.
However, how long does the average cat live?
According to the article "Longevity and mortality in cats..." by Michael S.
Kent and Authors, "The median age of death for spayed female cats was 10.28 years".
While they state that "the median age of death for castrated males was 9.55 years (IQR 5.30-12.83 years; range 0.18-21.19 years)"  However, "The median age at death for indoor only cats was 9.43 years (IQR 4.8-13.11 years, range 0.11-21.85 years) while the median age at death for indoor outdoor cats was 9.82 years (IQR 5.3-13.13 years, range 0.06-21.19 years) and the median age for outdoor cats was 7.25 years (IQR 1.78-11.92 years, range 0.12-20.64 years)" All embracing, various facts play into the longevity and overall health in a cat's life.
2010 AAFP/AAHA Feline Life Stage Guidelines
The Merck Veterinary Manual
Cat health info Cornell Feline Health Center
Notes on Acetaminophen Toxicosis in Cats
Ohio State University, College of Veterinary Medicine: Indoor pet initiative: For cat owners - discusses cat needs and how to meet them, problem solve and avoid common stressors
